My name is Melissa van Bussel and I'm a Senior Data Analyst at Statistics Canada,
but if you know me, you probably know me as the person who's been posting a lot
of YouTube videos about Generative AI. In the last year and a half-ish, I've spent
most of my free time making videos and giving talks and workshops about how to
use Generative AI as an R programmer. Now initially, this all started because I
was a bit fearful of Generative AI. I was really afraid that large language
models were going to take my job, or worse, take over the world, and so I
wanted to learn more about how these models worked and I wanted to understand
how to best use them. And the more that I started to learn about Gen AI, the less
afraid I became. And in fact, the exact opposite started to happen. I started to
become really excited about this stuff. I became a Gen AI fanatic and it sort of
became a special interest for me for a while. I became completely convinced that
this was going to permanently change the way that I thought about programming and
about data science more broadly. I wanted to talk about it with anyone who would
let me, and whenever one of my friends or someone online would be skeptical
about how useful the technology actually is, I was the one jumping into the
conversation and proclaiming that this was the next big world-changing thing.
And in some ways, I was definitely right. There's no denying that Generative AI has
forever changed the world as we know it. But even on a more individual level, this
really did change my world. My videos started getting a lot more views than
they ever had before, and people started reaching out to me more often, and my
network started to grow really, really fast. And then I got the email from Hadley
asking if I would talk about Generative AI at this conference, and I was ecstatic.
It truly felt like a dream come true. I was going to get to talk about my
favorite topic at my favorite conference, surrounded by the best possible people.
But as I've been preparing for this talk over the last six months or so, something
has happened. And I'm a little bit embarrassed to admit this, but I started
getting tired of hearing and talking about Generative AI. I ended up becoming
Gen-AI fatigued. The more that I used these tools in different projects and in
different contexts, the more walls I hit and the more frustrated I felt. And once
this light switch flipped for me from fanatic to fatigued, it started to become
much harder for me to have these conversations. And this definitely wasn't
helped by the sheer number of posts that I would see on social media that were
like this, many of which were using really aggressive marketing tactics. It
was just really tiring. But as I've been preparing for this talk, I've managed to
find some ways to get really excited about this stuff again. I have a feeling
that most people in this room have probably felt one of those three
feelings at some point. Or maybe you're like me and you've even felt a
combination. And as a side note here, if you feel like you don't see yourself in
any of those three categories, then it might be because I probably should have
called the last one Gen-AI hesitant. But then I wouldn't have had three words
that all start with the same letter and my overly organized brain just would not
have been okay with that. Either way though, I recognize that we're all in a
different place in our relationships with generative AI. And so I've tried to
design this talk in a way that there's something for everyone regardless of
where you're at. If you're a Gen-AI fanatic, then I want to talk about the
latest and greatest improvements that we've seen recently and why you might
care as someone who works with data. If you're Gen-AI fatigued, then first of all
I'm sorry. I'm really sorry that you have to listen to an hour-long talk about
Gen-AI, especially right before dinner and especially after a full day of
listening to talks that you're probably way more excited about than this one. But
if you're AI fatigued, then I want to show you some creative use cases that
you hopefully haven't seen before that might make you start to feel a bit
excited about Gen-AI again. And finally, if you're AI fearful, then I want to
share some best practices for working with Gen-AI tools more responsibly that
will hopefully help ease some of your worries. So this first part of the talk
is for the AI fanatics in the room, but before I dive into this section, I want
to talk a little bit about what it's like to be a fan. Now I'm Canadian and I
come from the country's capital, Ottawa, which is home to the world's largest
skating rink, the Rideau Canal. So naturally, as you might expect, I am a
huge fan of Love is Blind. Now for those who don't know, Love is Blind is a
Netflix dating reality TV show where contestants try to fall in love with
each other and get engaged without ever seeing each other face-to-face. It's a
really silly concept for a show, but it's definitely a guilty pleasure of mine.
Whenever a new season is going on, I become completely obsessed and I fully
immerse myself in the Love is Blind subculture. Now this is obviously
partially because I like the show, but it's also because my social media
algorithms become completely overtaken by Love is Blind content as soon as a
new season is out. I'll like one Instagram reel about which couples are
the cutest together and the next thing I know I'm deep in a YouTube rabbit hole
watching videos made by a therapist who psychoanalyzes each contestant and their
relationships. Point being, whenever there's new content to consume, I'm
consuming it. This obsession with wanting to know the latest and greatest is
something that members of all fandoms have in common. Whether the thing that
you're obsessed with is hockey, Love is Blind, or Gen AI. For the Gen AI fans,
this part is for you. We're going to be talking about the latest and greatest
advancements that we've seen recently. In particular, I'm going to be focusing
on OpenAI's GPT-4.0 model, which was just released a couple of months ago back in
May. GPT-4.0 is OpenAI's first model that combines text, vision, and audio
capabilities all in the same model. This means you can do things like upload
images, documents, and even CSVs and interact with all of them in the same
chat interface. You can also generate and then download outputs in all of those
formats as well. The other huge difference with GPT-4.0 is that the model's
available even on the free tier subscription. While the features I'm
going to talk about here aren't technically speaking new, they might be
new to anyone in the audience who hasn't been paying for a GPT Plus subscription.
One of the features that I've been finding really cool about the model is
its image processing capabilities. I can take an image on my phone and then I can
upload that photo into the chat and then ask questions about that image. I would
have loved this technology back when I was in university because I often found
myself taking pictures of math that was written out on chalkboards or whiteboards.
Now going from an image that has math in it to a digital format that
has math in it is a breeze and it's pretty accurate too. So with this prompt
here I'm asking the model to take the text from the image of the whiteboard
that you saw before and then convert that into a Cordo HTML document all while
keeping the text formatting the same. The model is able to do that on the first go
and is able to correctly identify where the headings should go and where the
math should go. And the file that you see here is actually what it generated
and this works on the first go without errors and if you render it this is what
it looks like. And I copied and pasted that directly from the actual Cordo
document that was generated so it really did turn out looking like that. I just
made things a little bit bigger so that it wouldn't look so funny on these big
screens. Even with more complicated handwriting I've been really impressed
with the model's ability to read and process math. So with this prompt I'm not
only asking it to convert the image into a Cordo HTML document but this time I'm
also asking it to add styling so that the colors in the document match the
colors of the pens that I was using. And once again the model has no trouble
doing this for us. Using images as inputs also comes in handy if you've got
data that are printed out. And if you've ever had a job doing data entry you're
definitely going to appreciate how easy GPT 4.0 makes this. You can digitize the
data and then ask questions about that data all in the same chat. And the data
that you see on the screen here is entirely fake. It was actually
simulated using GPT 4.0 and it's just something that shows the annual salary
for a bunch of made-up job roles and industries. And I'm going to be using
this data set in the next few examples. So first I'm asking chat GPT to convert
that table into a more usable format. A CSV is generated and then I can download
that CSV from within the chat. Not only can you see an interactive preview of
the data set but you can also modify it on the fly too. So you can do things like
highlight different columns or cells and then provide data cleaning or data
formatting instructions. You can also do things like simulate additional
observations including for variables that don't even exist on the data set. So
here I'm asking it to simulate additional observations so that there's
a total of 1,000 rows in the data set. And then I'm also asking it to create
two new variables. One representing the number of years of experience and the
highest level the other one being the highest level of education attained.
Whenever you make modifications to the data set the downloadable CSV is also
going to be updated accordingly to reflect those changes. And then if you
want to know how those modifications were applied you can click on the view
analysis button to see the underlying code that was run to generate those
changes. And while it's awesome to be able to provide data to the model in
unconventional ways like uploading an image or simulating data you can of
course provide data sets in more conventional ways as well like uploading
a file from your computer or connecting to OneDrive or Google Drive. Once you've
got some data that you're ready to analyze doing so is as easy as asking.
You can ask for things like a short overview of the data set, summary
statistics, or other exploratory analysis. One of the prompts that I've been using
and finding really helpful is asking the model to extract key insights and then
pull those key insights together into a short paragraph. And I realized that the
data set that I'm using here is entirely fake so those insights not interesting
at all. But you can see how something like this would be a great
starting point if you were analyzing real data. With the advanced data analysis
feature you can easily make quick visualizations like scatter plots and
box plots, heat maps, to name just a few. And with certain types of data
visualizations the plots are now interactive. So that means that you can
do things like hover over any of the data points or change any of the colors.
Once you're happy with how the plot looks you can download it as an image.
And if you want to create more complicated data visualizations you can do that. But
the model doesn't currently support interactivity for data set or data
visualizations that look like that. But with that being said you can still make
stuff that looks like that and have it appear in the chat. It's just going to
show up as a static image instead of an interactive plot. And at this point I
know there's probably some people in the room who might be thinking it's
gonna take my job. Like this is exactly what I do at work. And I know that that's
a really scary thought. But what I want to show is that doing this actually
takes quite a lot of data analysis expertise. Prompt engineering is a skill
that's going to go hand-in-hand with your existing data science and
programming skills. Rather than one that's going to replace the other. And
the reason why I say that is because the key to getting these plots to look
right is to be really really specific and detailed in your prompts. In the next
few slides we're going to build up this plot that you see here which is a bar
chart that shows the average annual salary grouped by job role and industry.
But we're going to do this using just one very detailed prompt. And the way
that I like to do this is by building things up in the same way that I would
if I were using ggplot. So I like to think about building the prompt up
layer by layer using the grammar of graphics but by using natural language
instead of code. Okay I hope everyone's ready because you're all about to become
professional prompt engineers. First we tell the model the data that we'd like
to use and here I'm using that job salaries data set from the example from
before. Next we're going to specify which aesthetics we want to map onto each
axis and I'm putting average average salary on the y-axis and job role on the
x-axis. And then I'm also asking for each job role to have a different color on
the plot. Next we're going to need to specify which type of data visualization
we'd like to create and here I'm trying to create a bar chart but specifically I
want to create a bar chart that's grouped by or faceted by the industry
variable. We can also add other statistics to the plot as well for
example a horizontal line showing the average salary for each industry. And
then the variable that's on the y-axis is a dollar value so I want to add some
formatting here by getting some dollar signs and some commas. And then I want
this plot to look nice but I don't want to spend a bunch of time fiddling around
with themes and color palettes so I'm going to ask chat GPT for help with this.
So here I'm asking for a modern color palette and a minimal theme and then I
want the legend to be displayed on the right side of the plot. All in all this
is the final prompt and it's very long but it's also specific enough that it's
going to give us exactly what we want. And with just that one prompt GPT 4.0
not only shows us the code that's necessary in order to generate that
visualization but then it's also going to execute that code and display the
image in the chat. And this is because you can now run Python code from
directly within the chat and this is a huge improvement over what we've seen in
the past. Because now you're going to be able to see right away whether or not
there's errors in the code and you don't need to copy paste the code into an IDE
in order to execute it. And if you want to make iterative updates to the code
you don't have to worry about switching back and forth between different windows.
These are just a few of the ways that GPT 4.0 can be helpful for data analysis
but the possibilities are truly endless. And if you want to learn more about the
model's capabilities you can check it out on OpenAI's website. The examples
that I've talked about so far are mostly for quick and dirty data exploration but
you can also use OpenAI's models programmatically in your scripts as well
which I'll talk about a little bit later.
Okay so for this part of the talk I want to address the people in the room who
are tired of hearing about generative AI. Now there's different reasons why you
might be feeling this way but if you're anything like me then your relationship
with generative AI might feel a bit like the experience of getting a new kitchen
gadget. A couple of Christmases ago I was super excited to be gifted an ice cream
maker. The advertising on the box said it was only going to take 20 minutes to
make the ice cream so I thought this was going to be a really fun and convenient
way to have ice cream whenever I wanted. But when it came time to actually make
the ice cream it turns out that it takes 20 minutes after you've pre-frozen the
bowl by putting it in the freezer for a full 24 hours. Definitely not as
straightforward as I thought it was going to be. And now this gadget
that I was once super excited about isn't getting used at all and is just
collecting dust. It doesn't really feel practical enough for regular use. I
tried out the ice cream maker a few times and it kind of worked but
eventually I just realized that buying the pre-made store-bought ice cream was
a lot easier and honestly took about the same amount of time. And you might feel
the same way about generative AI. Despite your initial excitement the lack
of practical convenient use cases that you can integrate into your everyday
workflow might have you feeling like it's just another overhyped kitchen
gadget taking up counter space. Instead of letting it go completely unused
though I want to show you some creative use cases that you hopefully haven't
seen before that might make gen AI feel as exciting again as it did that first
day that you used it. This section is going to be a little bit more technical
than the first so I want to start by giving a quick preview of what I'm going
to talk about before I get too deep into the nitty-gritty technical details. First
I'm going to talk about a Cordo reveal.js theme generator that I made. Next I'm
going to talk about an easy way to use gen AI to make hex sticker designs and
finally I'm going to talk about some tools that make teaching and
communicating about data a little bit easier. When working with data there are
often things that we do that are really important parts of the process but that
end up taking way longer than we want them to. It's often been said that the
vast majority of data analysis is actually data cleaning but I find for
myself my process looks a little bit more like this and I know that I'm not
alone. Making things look pretty is something that this particular community
is really really good at and if you're someone like Allison or Megan or Emil
then you probably don't mind spending a lot of time on making things look
pretty but if you're someone like me and you're not artistically talented but you
still care about making things look nice then you might find yourself wishing
there was an easier way. So if you're someone who finds fiddling with CSS and
color palettes to be kind of tedious then I want you to know that you're not
alone and I want to share with you some ways that I've been using generative AI
to cut down on the amount of time that I spend on making things look pretty
specifically when it comes to Cordo. I've given quite a few talks over the last
few years which means I've spent quite a lot of time on making Cordo slide decks
look nice. This is entirely a me problem because every time I give a new talk I
want the theme to be something that people have never seen before and I also
want it to be something that goes really well with the content of the slides
themselves. So like this talk for example when I was picking out a theme I wanted
to make sure that I picked something that was like fairly modern and minimal
looking because it just would not have made sense to give a talk about AI and
use Comic Sans. Now because I'm giving talks I want to make my slides publicly
available to other people and I want to do this in a way that's fully
reproducible where people can access not only the slides themselves but also
all of the underlying files that generate them. Whenever I make changes to
the content of the slides I want all of that to be version controlled and I also
want the public facing version of the slides to be automatically updated as
well. So this makes github pages perfect for the job and if there's anyone in the
audience who's wondering if I used Cordo and github pages for this talk the
answer is no because this slide deck has over 220 slides in it most of which just
have images on them and if you've ever made a Cordo presentation before then
you know that that would have taken way way too long but in general I do try to
use Cordo and github pages for presentations. Now if you've never used
github pages to host a Cordo project before then I think the best way that I
can describe it is that it kind of feels like assembling a puzzle. The end result
is super satisfying but you might spend hours searching for that one missing
piece and the reason why I say that is because the file structure and folder
structure that you need to use in order to get everything working correctly is
honestly it's a little bit complicated but the good news is that once you've
figured out how to successfully assemble this puzzle once you're always going to
know exactly how it all fits together.
Whenever you make a new Cordo theme and you post it using github pages this
folder structure that you see here is going to be the exact same every single
time. And if you want to make a new slide theme it's really only a handful of
files that need to be modified. So you're going to need any images that you want
to use for the slide backgrounds and then you're also going to need to make
some modifications to the custom SCSS file. Within the custom SCSS file it's
actually only a handful of lines of code that need to be modified and in
particular it's really just those strings that you see highlighted there
in yellow that need to be modified at all in order to create an entirely new
looking theme. And that's because if we change just those strings that are
highlighted in yellow then that means that we'd be changing the main font
family and the color palette. And those are the styling elements that are going
to make the largest most noticeable differences. Now we know that the folder
structure stays the same each time and we know that all we need to do in order
to create a new theme is generate some new images and make some minimal
styling changes to the custom SCSS file. And we also know that generative AI is
pretty good at generating images and at writing code. So we can combine all this
information together and conclude that creating Cordo themes is a use case
that's perfect for generative AI. So with all of these facts in mind I developed a
shiny app that starts by setting up this consistent file structure and then it
uses gen AI to create new images for the slide backgrounds and then the app uses
chat GPT to generate styling suggestions and then update the custom
SCSS file accordingly. The app looks like this and if you want to use it all you
need to do is enter in a phrase for the theme and then provide your open AI API
key. Once you click on the generate my theme button all of the files that are
necessary for the project are going to be generated for you. You can then
download those files and if you push the repo to github then the slides are
going to be automatically hosted using github pages without you needing to
modify any of the files. So everything's already properly configured for you. So
for example I used the phrase abstract purple minimal and here's the resulting
slide deck that was generated for me. And I didn't modify any of these files so
this is actually what it produced. And I know it doesn't look as pretty as it
would have if someone like Allison or Megan or Emil had made it but I think it
looks pretty good. If you're interested in trying this app out for yourself I'm
going to share the link to it in a couple of minutes but I first want to
talk about how generative AI is being used here. So first the background
images are generated using the image generation endpoint from the open AI API
and then the prompt that's passed to the model is a concatenation of the user's
input phrase and the words desktop background. And you might be wondering oh
actually forgot about this slide. So if for example let's say you know that you
want to create like a softer color palette for your theme and so you decide
to use the phrase pastel chalk. Then what the app is going to do is it's going to
take that phrase and then modify it so that the words desktop background are
added and the phrase that actually gets passed to the prompt or to the image
generation model is going to be pastel chalk desktop background. And you might
be wondering why that's necessary and the reason is because if we don't
include the words desktop background then the model is probably going to try
to create a really photorealistic image like that. Whereas if we include the
words desktop background then we're going to get something that looks a lot
more appropriate for background images in a slide deck. From here the app then
changes the opacity of the images to 20% so that if there's any text on the
slides it's actually going to be visible. To generate the styling suggestions the
code looks really similar to what we saw before but this time it's the chat
completions endpoint that's being used. And then the prompt that gets sent to
the model is super long and it says based on the user's input phrase
recommend a Google font, a color palette consisting of three colors, and a Pandoc
syntax highlighting theme. And then the key part of the prompt is the stuff
that's at the bottom there and here I'm specifying the format that I want the
results to come back in. And I'm asking for it to come back in a JSON format so
that the results are going to come back in a way that I can use them
programmatically instead of getting back a big long paragraph. And then finally
this information is then used to populate the custom SCSS file. And if you
want to see the details on how it gets populated then you can scan the QR code
on the left and that's going to take you to the Shiny app on shinyapps.io. From
there you can try the app out for yourself or you can take a look at the
underlying code that generates it. If you want to see a video tutorial on how to
use the app and how to upload everything so that it is all working with GitHub
pages then I've got a video on my YouTube channel which you can access by
scanning the QR code on the right. And I've also got other lots of step-by-step
tutorials there as well if you're interested in learning more about how to
automate things in general using GitHub actions. When I was preparing for this
talk and trying to decide what to include in it I messaged a lot of
different people to get their perspective on what they thought might
be interesting to this particular audience. A while back I was chatting
with one of the other keynote speakers, Hannes, and he said that he really liked
the idea of talking about practical applications of Gen AI in data science.
And he also humorously shared with me that he wasn't quite sure how a cat
picture generator could ever come in handy to someone who works with data. And
when I saw that message I thought to myself, yeah you know what that's totally
fair. There's definitely not a ton of obvious ways to use a cat picture
generator as a data scientist and if I'm being completely honest the only way
that I'd ever seen image generators being used in my everyday life was in a
group chat at my workplace for our R and Python user group or R pug for short.
One of my colleagues Jude would regularly send these hilarious AI
generated images of pugs and everyone in the chat would have a great time
trying to find everything that was wrong and broken with the images. And while
this is a great use case but definitely improved morale, Hannes' message did make
me wonder, is there a more practical way for people who work with data to use a
cat picture generator? So I thought about it and I want to share with you an
example of exactly how a cat picture generator might come in handy to this
audience. So imagine you've just created an awesome new R package and you want to
make a hex sticker which means you need a logo to represent the package. And for
the sake of this discussion let's say that this package just so happens to be
themed around cats. If you want to make a logo for a package then you're probably
looking for an image that's got a transparent background and that can be
scaled fairly easily without becoming too pixelated. There's now text to SVG
generators that are perfect for exactly this. You just enter in a phrase and then
an editable vector graphic is created for you. There's a ton of different
services that offer this but if you're looking for a free option then ReCraft
AI might be a great solution for you. Super easy to get started. You just enter
a prompt and then you specify a few options. You can set the height and width
ratio. You can optionally specify a color palette. You can set how simple or how
detailed you want the image to be. And then you can choose from a ton of
different art styles. And when I say a ton I mean a ton. I only put a few on
this slide but ReCraft AI has over 20 different styles for generating vector
images. Some of the styles are definitely better suited than others depending on
what you're trying to use the image for. And I find that if you're trying to make
a hex sticker then the cartoon style works pretty well. And just
like with other image generators you can do things like fine-tune or generate
variations. And then because the image that's been created is a vector graphic
rather than a raster image you can also easily change any of the colors. Once
you've got an image that you're happy with you can easily turn it into a hex
sticker design. ReCraft AI also has a lot of other really cool features too
including the ability to generate mock-ups which is awesome if you want to
see what something's going to look like before you order a bunch of them. Next I
want to talk about two tools that make teaching and communicating about data a
little bit easier. The first is a tool called Scribe and Scribe allows you to
automatically create step-by-step tutorials without needing to copy paste
screenshots or record any videos. This is super helpful if you want to teach
someone how to do a programming task. As a simple example let's say I want to
show someone how to make a new R project using Posit Cloud. So first I would start
the capture using the Scribe Chrome extension and then Scribe is going to
start automatically writing numbered instructions based on what I'm doing in
the capture. Anytime I click somewhere or type something the screenshot is going
to be automatically generated for me and then the location where I've typed or
clicked is going to be highlighted in orange. If I don't like the way that any
of the descriptions have been written I can click on the instruction to modify
what it says. Once the capture is stopped you can use Gen AI to create a
title and a description for the tutorial again both of which can be modified if
you don't like them. Once you're happy with the tutorial you can share it for
free with others either by a direct link or by email or you can embed it as an
iframe for example in a quarter website. Now using the Scribe Chrome extension is
free but there's also a pro subscription available which gives you access to
things like the desktop version of Scribe and the desktop version is awesome
if you've got something that you want to show someone how to do using an IDE that
you only have installed locally on your machine. The pro subscription also comes
with the ability to export in a variety of really useful formats including
Markdown. The last tool that I want to talk about that I find really helpful
for teaching data science is called Descript and this is honestly probably
one of the coolest things I have ever used. I've used Descript to edit every
single YouTube video that I've made in the last three years and this has saved
me countless hours of video editing and that's because if you use Descript you
can edit videos or podcasts as if you're editing a Word document. So you just
upload the video or audio file into Descript and then it's going to be
transcribed for you. Transcription is available in over 20 different languages
and it's really impressive, impressively accurate, sorry, even for technical words
and phrases. Once the transcript is ready you can edit the transcript in order to
edit the video itself. So if I've got this paragraph highlighted here and then
I delete that paragraph it's going to automatically trim the video to the
correct locations. With the click of a button you can do things like remove
awkward silences and filler words which is great if you're someone who's guilty
of saying um way too much. Descript also has AI speech generation capabilities
and you can make a clone of your own voice in as little as 60 seconds. So if
you don't like the way that a word sounded when you originally recorded it
you can use your voice clone to regenerate the content. And if you don't
like the wording that you used and you want to change that up altogether then
you can use the overdub feature to replace it without needing to re-record
the clip. Descript also has a lot of other really cool AI power features as
well. For example they've got an eye contact feature which is going to make
it look like you're making eye contact with the camera even if you're not. So if
you're someone who makes videos using a script then you don't need to memorize
that script. You can just read it directly from your screen and it's going
to make it look like you're looking directly into the camera anyways. If
you're a perfectionist like me and you often find yourself re-recording
sentences when you make videos because you want them to sound perfect then
you're gonna love Descript's remove retakes feature. Descript is
going to automatically detect your repeated takes and then you can remove
the bad takes instantly. A feature that I've been using a lot and finding super
helpful is the YouTube description generator. So from your transcript,
Descript is going to generate a YouTube style video description including
detecting where chapters should go and then providing the timestamps for those
chapters in the generated video description. So if you're someone who
loves talking about or teaching about data science but you've been feeling
overwhelmed about the amount of work that it takes to edit videos or podcasts
then I really recommend giving Descript a try. If you didn't find yourself
fitting into those first two categories then maybe you resonate more with the
idea of being fearful of generative AI.
Like maybe you're afraid that AI powered machines are gonna take over the world
and our AI overlords are gonna keep us trapped in a vat of goop forcing us to
live in a simulated universe for the rest of our lives. But I know that I'm
giving this talk to a really technical audience so I think most people in this
room probably have a pretty intuitive sense of what these models are and
aren't capable of. So I know that fearful isn't exactly the right word. But really
though this part of the talk is for anyone who wants some guidance on how to
use these tools more responsibly. And I know I've been making a few jokes up
here but this is the part of the talk where things are going to be a little
bit more serious. The government of Canada has put together a guide on the
use of generative AI and the target audience for that guide is for public
servants. And I'm a Canadian public servant so I personally think the guide
is pretty good. But I think that regardless of what you do for your job
or what context you're using gen AI in, this guide has a lot of really useful
tips in it. You can find the guide at the link at the bottom but that link is
super long so it's definitely easiest if you just Google guide on the use of
generative AI and then click on the link that's from the government of
Canada. This guide is super detailed but they've also developed a really
convenient acronym that highlights the key principles. The acronym is FASTER and
it stands for fair, accountable, secure, transparent, educated, and relevant. FAIR
means ensuring that outputs are accessible, inclusive, and comply with
human rights. Many of these models have used publicly available data from the
internet as part of their training data which means that these models have the
potential to produce outputs that amplify historical biases and stereotypes
and other types of harmful information. So it's really important to always
manually review outputs and remove anything that's biased, non-inclusive, or
discriminatory. Gen AI should never be used to make decisions about an
individual that could impact them materially or legally or lead to a
discrimination in services. Doing this could violate human rights but it's also
against the terms of service for most of the popular tools. So for example OpenAI
has a policy that prohibits its users from using the models to make decisions
about an individual related to things like credit and housing and employment.
And then Google's also got a Gen AI prohibited use policy which contains
some pretty similar terms. Accountable means ensuring that outputs are accurate,
legal, and ethical. To ensure that outputs are accurate they should always
be manually reviewed by a human to make sure that it's factually correct. Large
language models shouldn't be used as search engines and they also shouldn't
be used for tasks that you're not already somewhat skilled in yourself. So
for example if I'm using Gen AI to help me out with a programming task the key
word there is always help. I'm asking the model to help me out with something
that I already know how to do myself and I'm asking it to use packages that I
either already know and use or that I've got the documentation for opened up side
by side. And this way I can actually verify that what's being produced makes
sense, follows best practices, and uses a style that other people actually use.
Keeping track of legalities isn't always easy if you're not a lawyer. So consult
your organization's legal department if you have one. If you don't have one try
your best to stay up-to-date on policy related to AI regulation however you can.
And at a bare minimum make sure you've read the terms of service for any tools
that you're using and ensure that your usage is compliant. Make an effort to
determine whether or not the methods used to obtain the training data were
legal and ethical and you can lower your risk of copyright issues by only using
Gen AI for tasks that are less likely to include copyright protected information.
So for example that means that you can use it to do things like edit or improve
content that you wrote yourself rather than generating content completely from
scratch. Secure means ensuring that personal information and privacy are
protected at all times. Never enter sensitive or personal information and
always abstract away as much as you possibly can. You should use synthetic
data where possible or you can even go a step further and just change all the
variable names in your prompt. So take the prompt that you actually want to ask
and then replace all the variables with more generic names and then just change
everything back after the fact. You should also make sure that you've
actually read the terms of service in full and that you understand whether or
not your inputs are going to be used as training data or to otherwise further
improve model performance in the future. Try to opt out of this feature where
possible and prioritize using services that do have an opt-out option.
Transparent means being upfront about how Gen AI tools are being used. So if
you've used generative AI for a project then it's really important to keep a
detailed record about how it was used. If you make a public-facing tool that uses
Gen AI then it's extremely important to inform users of this. The way that you
inform users might be different depending on the type of content. So for
example if you've generated an image you might want to include a watermark or if
it's content that's text-based then you might want to include a note. And then
the types of information that should be incorporated into these notes includes
the exact tool and the version that was used, how the tool works and why it's
being used, and to what extent outputs were reviewed or modified. And all of
this should be explained in a non-technical way. Educated means being
knowledgeable about Gen AI tools before using them. So this means understanding
the strengths and limitations of different models and also understanding
how to use these tools more responsibly. It also means knowing how to write
effective prompts. Most of the popular tools have really great documentation
that shows you how to get the best possible results for that specific model
but you might also find that taking a formal course or workshop on prompt
engineering is really helpful. And finally being educated about Gen AI
means keeping yourself up to date on the newest advancements and best practices.
Doing this can be really really challenging because this space is
constantly evolving but subscribing to newsletters or participating in
communities of practice is a great way to do this. There's also a ton of talks
at this conference about Generative AI that I really recommend checking out
including an entire session tomorrow afternoon on exactly this topic. R is the
last letter in the FASTER acronym and it stands for relevant. Relevant means
determining if Gen AI is really relevant to the task at hand. We talked today
about some examples of use cases that lend themselves really well to Generative
AI but there's definitely a ton of others that don't. And if you try to use
Gen AI when it's not necessary it's kind of like watering your houseplants with a
hose. You can technically do it but it's definitely overkill. It's gonna take way
longer than the traditional method of doing it and you're making a huge mess
for no reason. Regardless of how you're using it if you're using Gen AI aligning
your usage with the FASTER principles is a great way to ensure more responsible
use. When I first started working on this talk I was definitely Gen AI fatigued so
I'm really grateful to have had this opportunity to start to feel like all
three of these again. Regardless of which one you most see yourself as I hope this
talk had something that you found beneficial. Whether you love Gen AI, hate
it, or are somewhere in between my goal was to provide practical actionable tips
to make your everyday life easier. These tools are always changing and keeping up
to date can be really difficult but one thing that's always remained constant is
the need to be really really specific and detailed with your prompts and to
build things up layer by layer using the existing expertise that you already have
and the mental models that you already understand. Thinking outside of the box
to identify practical creative use cases is a great way to avoid feeling the
fatigue or at least to minimize it because I know for myself I'm always
going to feel exhausted by these posts on LinkedIn. And finally finding a
framework that will help you and your organization use Gen AI more
responsibly is key to addressing hesitancy and fear. The faster principles
are a great example of this. Regardless of how you feel about generative AI I am
super happy to chat more about any of this so please feel free to come say hi
to me over the next few days or you can find my contact information on the
screen. Thanks so much for listening and I'm happy to take any questions.
Thanks Melissa. So as you can see from the link on the slide if you want to ask
questions please go to Slido. Either ask a question or upvote one of the ones
that's there. So we've got a few to get started with. Gen AI has a
significant carbon footprint for both training the models and making
predictions from them. How do you think we should manage enthusiasm given the
potential environmental impacts? Yeah that's a great question. I think
the R part of that faster acronym really comes in handy here because
there's such a high cost to doing these things. It's really important to consider
carefully whether or not it actually needs to be used and try to not use it
when it's not necessary in order to minimize that that impact. Thanks. The
next question definitely occurred to me as well. So when you're creating that
visualization it felt like you spent so much time coming up with the prompt.
Wouldn't it have been easier to just write the ggpot2 code? Yeah yes and it's only an
hour long talk so it's hard to like fit everything in but originally the thing
that I wanted to say there was that like that's kind of the point. If you want the
results to be really good it's actually going to take about the same amount of
time as it would to just write the code but the key benefit here is that you
don't need to like memorize the syntax. So you're still using the same concepts
that you already know from that programming background but you don't
have to remember all the little details. I will say personally that I have
used chat GPT to ask questions about ggplot2 and how to change things in the
I don't even remember that stuff. As someone who works with EHR data I am
hesitant to use copilot because of concerns around sharing patient health
information accidentally. Can you kind of share like your thoughts on like what
happens when you're working with confidential data? Maybe you've got
experience using local models? Yeah so my recommendation would be just don't like
don't use it for anything that is sensitive or confidential unless like
maybe your organization has specific policies on that and then maybe it's okay
but yeah for myself personally like this is stuff that I'm doing in my personal
time where I know the stuff that's being provided is not confidential and it's
like stuff that I would put on github or wherever anyways and a rule that I like
to think of is just like if if it were posted publicly online like my entire
prompt history would I be comfortable with that and if the answer is no then I
probably shouldn't be asking that prompt. I think that that criteria would not
work for me because I'd be embarrassed by how many stupid questions. I read a
comment saying I was impressed by how well it did putting things into quarto
especially given like how new quarto is like do you think it works like LLM's
GNI still work pretty well even on new or less commonly used topics?
Yeah that's an awesome question and I think if this talk were happening like
six months ago my answer would probably be no like no it's not the greatest at
knowing how to do stuff with newer tools but with GPT 4.0 in particular you
can provide you can provide like documentation or you can also ask it to
like Google things and it has the ability to like access the internet so
yeah now if there's a tool that was like just released like a package that just
came out you can just provide a link to the documentation for that package and
it's going to be able to read that and then give you actually good answers.
This isn't directly related to generative AI but I think it's an
interesting question. The internet can be a horrible place. Yes. And how do you
kind of deal with that as like a content creator? How do you deal with the trolls
and other awful awful people? Well I think personally I've been pretty lucky
thankfully I think that's in large part because the community that we have here
is so awesome. I haven't really had any like toxic comments or anything. If I did
I would definitely delete them. I think like the worst comment that I've got was
just like mentioning that I have some vocal fry in my voice so that's not
that's not too bad. Okay we'll take one last question and this was an interest to me as
well. So how much time do you spend researching which generator to use for
a specific purpose? Like how do you decide what to go with and how do you keep up
with how do you find all these sites with cool AI powered features? Yeah I so
I use like open AI more than pretty much anything else but honestly I think
just like LinkedIn. I follow a lot of people on there and just like that's
pretty much the only way that I keep up to date with what's going on in this
space. Cool. Thanks a lot. Please join me in thanking Melissa one last time.